[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How do you act and react
in every day of your life,
these are the building blocks
and this is the real part
of longevity.
>> People are a
lot more stressed.
Mental health crisis, health
crisis, climate crisis.
And I think the only way
these problems can be solved
is if we raise
collective consciousness.
And that comes from
self-awareness,
that comes from being
truly embodied and aware
of your own state.
You can't make a
difference if you're
running 100 miles an hour.
You really need to stop.
[CLOCK TICKING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we hear about longevity,
the usual focus is on lifespan
and how many years
one lives in total.
In this episode, we want
to focus on healthspan.
That is the number of years
we get to live well, making
good use of our minds and body.
This gets us started
with holistic well-being
and preventive health.
The Western healthcare
system was mostly
built on reactive
health, which means
responding to the
rise of health issues
rather than living a lifestyle
that prevents them from arising
in the first place.
>> A crisis of longevity of the
planet and of us as a species
within this planet.
We really have to understand
how everything is interlinked.
And if we don't understand
how everything is interlinked
within our body, how
sleep affects how you eat
and how it affects your mood,
and how exercise affects
your mental state, and how all
of these things are interlinked.
>> Through all the people that
are shaping the world today
and making the biggest
decisions in the world today,
we're living in a
crisis in so many ways.
Working with a
change-makers and helping
influence them to think
a bit more sustainably
about themselves,
that will then make,
hopefully, help them
think a bit more
sustainably about their
workforce and the environment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To come back to the longevity
of a single individual,
I do think there is definitely
potential for us to live longer.
The question is how.
It's not just about lifespan,
how long are we living,
but how are we spending those
additional years of our life?
And here, we're talking
about healthspan.
We don't want to live another
20 years if those 20 years are
going to be miserable.
We want to make sure that the
last years that we are living,
we are living with as
much health as possible,
with as much
autonomy as possible.
And a lot of factors come
into that, not just medicine.
>> But I think it's also really
important to think about quality
of life and healthspan.
It's not just about
how many years
you live if you're
not living the best
quality of life in those years.
I mean, who wants to be
living till they're 100
if you're spending the
last 20 years of your life
with really chronic conditions
or not really able to move
or not able to
function on your own?
So yes, lifespan is
how many years can you
live, whereas healthspan
is how many years
of quality, healthy
life can you live,
which is more important
than lifespan.
We want to extend your
life, but all of those years
to be with full of
vitality and good health.
>> I have been fascinated by
Eastern medicine for years
and learned a lot of wisdom
that I have integrated
into my day-to-day life.
The preventive aspect
of Eastern traditions
is what got me most interested.
When I first came
across it, even just
the idea of getting familiar
with the specific health
associations of our
organs was outlandish.
That is because I grew
up in an environment
where this was
never talked about.
And as we cover in
our education episode,
the culture we come from
shapes our perspectives.
By now, I have benefited from
Eastern wisdom in many ways.
And the function
of our organs just
seems like a starting point.
When we dive into
holistic well-being,
there is a whole
universe to explore.
Companies like DRYM Health
are at the intersection
of human performance and new
areas of holistic health.
At the root of a holistic
approach to life is the way
we care for ourselves.
I believe we can
better help others
if we first keep a healthy
relationship with ourselves.
This is why companies
covering mental health also
overlap with
longevity as a field.
Until a few years ago, mental
health was a taboo topic.
Ironically, this also comes
from collective shame,
which, in itself, is an
emotion to understand
within mental health.
The more we expand our
emotional awareness
in the day-to-day life, the more
we can show up authentically,
and that is a great starting
point for a long healthspan.
>> I was in psychology.
I was working in the NHS as a
Cognitive Behavioral Therapist
and very quickly
excelled into management
and supervising
other therapists.
Was even asked to do
a leadership course,
a six-month "Leading in the
Public Services" course.
And it was then that
I noticed that I've
got more to offer here.
I can have more of
an impact than I
am in this kind of bureaucratic
environment that I was in.
Although I'm grateful for having
had the experience in the NHS
and having made a difference
to so many people,
there are a lot of limitations
in the public services.
>> I became the CEO of this
company at the age of 30,
and it was one of the leading
companies in this niche market
of personalized medicine.
But in this case,
we were dealing
with patients that were very
chronically and severely ill,
cancer patients that were in
the last year of their life
that needed a lot
of support at home.
And we were, basically,
a one-stop shop for this,
combining a
multidisciplinary approach
with doctors, nutritionists,
pharmacists, and so on.
I always thought
it was a bit sad
that we waited until
people got cancer
to start dealing
with them in a very
personalized and holistic way.
And I felt like
firefighting way too late.
After 10 years, I felt like
it was the right time for me
to change a chapter and
start something-- start
something from
scratch because I love
building things from scratch.
And I felt like bringing
this holistic approach
into a more preventative and
proactive form of health care,
where we're not waiting
for people to get severely
ill until we start doing
something about it.
>> This is what really drove us
to want to do something focused
on leaders and businesses and
fast-growth companies because we
come from that background and
we've seen what it's like.
So we then decided
to start DRYM,
working with fast-moving,
fast-paced individuals,
helping them improve their
health and well-being
holistically, so
we can, therefore,
improve their performance
in a sustainable way.
Not for short-term performance,
but for long-term sustainable
gains.
I think that's where we
realized that we wanted to,
one, do something together,
work with leaders,
because, we felt that
working with people
who have the influence over
the rest of the company
is really important.
>> When we zoom out and we
look at holistic well-being,
the work-life balance
crisis comes up.
On average, we spend
about half of our waking
hours at work during the
week in our lifetimes.
That is about 30% of
all our waking hours.
How do we make sure that we
spend all that work time well?
There are many measures we can
take to improve our workdays,
but at the core of it lies
always the same question--
do we enjoy what we do?
Some of the most satisfied
people I interact with
say that their work
doesn't feel like work.
Isn't it sad that those
people are still the minority?
So the question becomes,
how do we change that?
>> How are we expecting leaders
to understand how to change,
to create positive change
for the environment,
to reach our sustainable goals
without really understanding
this at a micro level
within their own organism?
At the end of the day, the
aspect of sustainable growth
has to come down to,
really, people individually
understanding what does
sustainable growth mean
for them individually
and then expanding that
into the whole of society.
>> We're constantly distracted.
We're not even
aware of what we're
doing to the environment,
what we're doing to our teams.
Especially for
leaders, when you're
stressed out all the time, those
hormones are leaking out of you.
Your team will feel that stress.
>> And the language of numbers
to really make them understand
that the way that they are
leading their companies,
that is the same way they
should be leading their lives.
There's absolutely
no reason why you
should have a whole
dashboard of KPIs which
is tracking whether your company
is going in the right direction,
while you shouldn't have
that dashboard of KPIs
for your personal health.
>> There are many parts of
our culture that we are only
starting to question now.
The UK recently tested a
four-day workweek across 60
companies with about 3,000
employees for six weeks,
and the results were incredible.
92% of those companies chose
to continue the experiment.
Their staff was more motivated
and their productivity
did not decrease.
And actually, one-third
of those companies
chose to adopt a four-day
workweek permanently.
>> We apply a three-step process
in our methodology-- test,
track, and transform.
During the testing phase,
it's really important
to establish a baseline
of where you are now.
So before you start implementing
all of these changes,
we want to see what is
your starting place.
And this is why we
use different tests.
So there's a
comprehensive blood test
which looks at key markers
for health but also longevity.
>> And although there's
standards of how we deal with
these things, understanding
the human body,
the individual in
a better layer,
and then developing targeted
therapies for that person is
going to lead to
better outcomes.
And what we try to do,
again, from a proactive and
preventative approach,
is that we say,
OK, let's start
really understanding
your body from now.
>> And it's a very exciting
space because researchers are
developing more and
more biomarkers for--
the more these are
developed, the more
we can implement them
into our testing kit.
But we also tested a
range of other things,
such as gut test, hormone tests.
And getting this baseline
of someone's current state
of health gives us
a very good view
of which areas do they
really need to improve on
and which ones will
have the most impact.
>> And this is also
known as Medicine 3.0.
A very big part of Medicine 3.0
is personalization as well as
tracking data
because we can only
understand what works for
one person and not the other
if we are measuring what
is working overtime.
Looking at the data,
not from a perspective
of what you find today.
If you go today to your GP,
they will do your bloods,
and if everything is
not in the normal range,
you will be sent home.
But they will only
do something with you
once you are outside of
the normal range, where
then, already, we start
with prescribing medication.
We're trying to look at,
within the normal range, what
is optimal.
And if you are this close
to not being in the normal,
maybe we should be doing
something about that before.
>> Basically, we can predict,
based on the fact you're a man
or a woman, of a certain
size and a certain age,
what you should be able
to get this score up to.
The trend is such that as we get
older, human beings get older,
the score is
supposed to go down.
So effectively, by
exceeding whatever
your age-predicted score
is, essentially, you're
keeping your body in a state
that a younger person would be.
>> You're aging slower.
>> Or you're preventing your
body from slipping into it like
an older-age condition.
This is really the
key, is that what we do
is we build up what we
call functional capacity.
And because human beings
are aerobic organisms that
use oxygen to burn their
fuel, to make their energy
to be able to do their function
or their exercise or activity,
if we're able to achieve higher
rates of oxygen consumption
during activity, this tells us
that our functional capacity
is greater than
it's supposed to be.
And as we get older,
this functional capacity
is supposed to decrease.
So if we maintain it
at a higher level,
essentially, we're, yes,
preventing the effects of aging
or keeping them at bay.
>> And it's something that you
track over time because instead
of just counting the years
that you are on this Earth,
we're counting, over time,
what is my VO2 max today,
what is it in five years,
and how is that progressing?
And then evaluating
how fast are we aging.
>> So what we do then is we can
use this information that we
derived from the test to start
giving them better advice about
their exercise, to make it
appropriate and effective
for them so that
they can, in fact,
improve this score over time
and improve their chances
of longevity.
>> What I am personally
fascinated by is how we are
gradually discovering through
science what was already known
in many Indigenous cultures
for a very long time.
It has made me
explore the wisdom.
And I think there is
no bottom to that well.
The most helpful
distinction I have learned
is the distinction between
experiential wisdom
and intellectual wisdom.
Intellectual wisdom is when
our mind understands a concept.
Experiential wisdom is
when we have experienced
that concept ourselves so we
understand it much more deeply.
In Buddhism, the Buddha
himself discovered
through meditation aspects
of modern physics and biology
that we know today
through science.
It was experiential
understanding
which he translated into words.
[SOFT MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How do we make sure that the
data is not making people sicker
but is actually making people
understand their bodies more
and tune into their bodies
and develop that intuition?
>> Sleep, nutrition,
movement, and mind.
It's a cycle.
The way we think impacts the
way we feel physically and vice
versa.
If we're then noticing
that our body is anxious,
we've got butterflies,
we feel tense,
that then impacts the way
we think about the situation
and it becomes a bit
of a vicious cycle.
So I think it is so important to
just stop, be present, and sit
with your feelings,
sit with your body.
How does it feel?
>> We see it in the work
that we do with our clients,
that even though the data gives
us so much of a framework to be
making the right decisions, it's
also important to understand
when data is too much and when
you should be taking devices
away from people and making sure
that they are still connecting
to their bodies and tuning
into how do they actually feel.
>> An exciting part of longevity
as a field is that it brings
so many different
disciplines together.
We can look at it from a science
angle, from a tech perspective,
or from a practitioner
viewpoint.
The cutting edge of the
intersection of these areas
will always be there.
There is no limit to
what we can discover.
On the Road to
Utopia, I hope we get
empowered to learn more
through experiential wisdom
as well and manifest a life
aligned with our purpose.
I hope the emphasis
on holistic well-being
becomes about empowering
ourselves to explore
the modalities and the
areas of wisdom that
resonate the most with us.
Our bodies and minds are
entire universes of their own,
and we are the
captains of the ship.
>> Ultimately, for me, this
is about what role can I play
and can DRYM Health play
in expanding the collective
consciousness so that we
can truly have an impact?
>> And this is exactly what
we're trying to achieve.
We want to have that aha
moment where a leader really
comes to the point
that they're like,
oh, this is not just
about my well-being.
I'm actually
showing up every day
to lead this company
in a much better state.
The way I am dealing with
the team is in a better way.
And the ability of a
leader to deal with stress,
which really is affected by all
of these aspects that we work
with-- sleep, nutrition,
exercise, mind--
is so important with regards
to the level of the stress
that the team feels.
So this is a very
big part of what
we do at DRYM and a very big
part of where I see medicine,
in general, developing
in the future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[FLOATING WORLD, "NOBODY KNOWS"]
Going south.
Nobody knows my name.